adding a "packaging flow" overview document (#1100)
pypa/packaging.python.org: source/flow.rst

  a version control system (VCS).

- Prepare a configuration file describing the package metadata (name, version
  and so forth) and how to create the build artifacts. For most packages, this
  will be a :file:`pyproject.toml` file, maintained maunally in the source
  tree.

- Create build artifacts to be sent to the package distribution service
  (usually PyPI); these will normally be a
  :term:`source distribution ("sdist") <Source Distribution (or "sdist")>`
  and one or more :term:`built distributions ("wheels") <Built Distribution>`.
  These are made by a build tool using the configuration file from the
  previous step. Often there is just one generic wheel for a pure Python
  package.

- Upload the build artifacts to the package distribution service.

At that point, the package is present on the package distribution service.
To use the package, end users must:

- Download one of the package's build artifacts from the package distribution
  service.

- Install it in their Python environment, usually in its ``site-packages``
  directory. This step may involve a build/compile step which, if needed, must
  be described by the package metadata.

> These last 2 steps are typically performed by a tool like :ref:`pip`.

Reviewer: @cameron-simpson This is nit-picky, but I removed this line in my first round of edits because the steps didn't mention any other tools, so it seemed out of place. Do you feel strongly about including it?

  and so forth) and how to create the build artifacts. For most packages, this
  will be a :file:`pyproject.toml` file, maintained maunally in the source
  tree.

- Create build artifacts to be sent to the package distribution service
  (usually PyPI); these will normally be a
  :term:`source distribution ("sdist") <Source Distribution (or "sdist")>`
  and one or more :term:`built distributions ("wheels") <Built Distribution>`.
  These are made by a build tool using the configuration file from the
  previous step. Often there is just one generic wheel for a pure Python
  package.

- Upload the build artifacts to the package distribution service.

At that point, the package is present on the package distribution service.
To use the package, end users must:

- Download one of the package's build artifacts from the package distribution
  service.

- Install it in their Python environment, usually in its ``site-packages``
  directory. This step may involve a build/compile step which, if needed, must
  be described by the package metadata.

These last 2 steps are typically performed by :ref:`pip` when an end user runs

> ``pip install``.

Reviewer: @cameron-simpson Thanks for explaining your reasoning; I understand what you're going for. Here's a small tweak.

- install it in their Python installation, usually in its ``site-packages``
  directory; this install step may involve a build/compile step which,
  if needed, must be described by the package metadata

These last 2 steps are typically performed by a tool like `pip`_.

.. _pip: https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/

The Steps In More Detail
========================

The steps above are described in more detail below.

The Source Tree
---------------

The source tree contains the package source code, usually a checkout from a VCS.
The particular version of the code will will typically be from a checkout
based on a tag associated with the version.

The Configuration File
----------------------

The configuration file depends on the tool used to build the build artifacts.
Modern practice is a ``pyproject.toml`` file in `TOML format`_
whose contents are specified by
`PEP 517`_ and `PEP 518`_ (specifying a build system),
and `PEP 621`_ (storing project metadata in ``pyproject.toml``).

.. _TOML format: https://github.com/toml-lang/toml
.. _PEP 517: https://peps.python.org/pep-0517/
.. _PEP 518: https://peps.python.org/pep-0518/
.. _PEP 621: https://peps.python.org/pep-0621/

> At a minimum, the ``pyproject.toml`` file needs:

Author: [ I sent this as email, but it seems to have... vanished :-( So I'm inserting it here. Sorry for any duplication. ]

Hmm. Would it make sense to talk about "good practice"? I just reread
the paragraph in PEP 621 under "Table name" more closely and indeed it
is as you say. But it seems like there are standard fields that belong
in ``[project]`` and would presumeably be better there. I'd expect that
the more that can go in that table, the less difficulty there would be
switching tools.

I don't want to provide incorrect information. And I really don't want
to provide _complex_ information in this document.

What about something like this?

    A `pyproject.toml`` file should have:

    * a ``[project]`` table containing the `Core Metadata`_ for the
      project which are defined in ``PEP 621``. See `Declaring
      project metadata`_ for more detail.

    * a ``[tool]`` table containing metadata not defined by ``PEP 621``,
      as described by ``PEP 518``

    * a ``[build-system]`` table specifying your build tool,
      which *you* will use to create the build artifacts
      and which an *installer* such as `pip` will use
      to complete an install from a source distribution

    .. _Declaring project metadata: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/declaring-project-metadata/

Let me know what you think of the above please.

> At a minimum, the ``pyproject.toml`` file needs:

Reviewer 2: > I don't want to provide incorrect information. And I really don't want
to provide complex information in this document.

Probably you picked the wrong packaging ecosystem to summarise 🤣 

> Would it make sense to talk about "good practice"?

I don't think it is a matter of being good practice or not. In the end of the day it might not be up to the end-user to decide that. A backend might be implemented to consume configuration in `starlark`, `yaml`, `json5`, etc, and that is fine. PEP 621 is clear that backends might opt out completely from it.

Maybe something along the lines:

```rst
At a minimum, the ``pyproject.toml`` file needs:

* a ``[build-system]`` table specifying your build tool,
  which *you* will use to create the build artifacts
  and which an *installer* such as `pip` will use
  to complete an install from a source distribution

Very frequently you might also specify in ``pyproject.toml`` (depending on the tools you use):

* a ``[project]`` table containing project metadata
  (See `Declaring project metadata`_ for more detail).

* a ``[tool]`` table containing tool-specific configuration options.

.. _Declaring project metadata: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/declaring-project-metadata/
```

> At a minimum, the ``pyproject.toml`` file needs:

Author: > > And I really don't want
> > to provide complex information in this document.
> 
> Probably you picked the wrong packaging ecosystem to summarise 🤣

I wouldn't be writing a doc like this for a trite ecosystem :-)

> > Would it make sense to talk about "good practice"?
> 
> I don't think it is a matter of being good practice or not. In the end of the day it might not be up to the end-user to decide that. A backend might be implemented to consume configuration in `starlark`, `yaml`, `json5`, etc, and that is fine. PEP 621 is clear that backends might opt out completely from it.

Ah. So `pyproject.toml` is intended as (a) a common way forward for tools and things like `pip` to interoperate and (b) a place where tools _can_ put their information, but that is not prescribed as necessary.

> Maybe something along the lines:

I've used most of this, keeping some of the old text for better context:

```At a minimum, the ``pyproject.toml`` file needs:

* a ``[build-system]`` table specifying your build tool,
  which *you* will use to create the build artifacts
  and which an *installer* such as `pip` will use
  to complete an install from a source distribution

Very frequently you might also specify in ``pyproject.toml``
(depending on the tools you use):

* a ``[project]`` table containing project `Core Metadata`_
  (name, version, author and so forth);
  see `Declaring project metadata`_ for more detail

* a ``[tool]`` table containing tool-specific configuration options

.. _Core Metadata: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/core-metadata/
.. _Declaring project metadata: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/declaring-project-metadata/
```

> At a minimum, the ``pyproject.toml`` file needs:

Author: BTW, can I (and should I) use relative URLs in references. For example, where I've got this URL:

    https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/core-metadata/

would it be better to have:

    specifications/core-metadata/

(which would rather assume the location of this document) or this:

    /specifications/core-metadata/

which knows this document is in the same set but not its in-tree location?

> At a minimum, the ``pyproject.toml`` file needs:

Author: It feels like this adds further complexity to the paragraph, which is intended to be quite succinct.

We can add terminology like "build frontend" (not in the glossary, BTW) in the `The Build System` elaboration below though.

What do you think of this instead:

```
+ exec git diffdiff --git a/source/flow.rst b/source/flow.rst
index 50c6257..6f0bdd2 100644
--- a/source/flow.rst
+++ b/source/flow.rst
@@ -107,6 +107,11 @@ The Build System
 ----------------

 The build tool itself is specified by the required table ``[build-system]``.
+Most build tools provide a "build frontend" such as a command line mode
+for creating the build artifacts.
+All can also be used via the `build`_ module
+which understands the ``[build-system]`` table.
+
 There are several choices available, including but not limited to:
 `flit`_, `hatch`_, `pdm`_, `poetry`_, `setuptools`_, `trampolim`_,
 `whey`_.
```

> At a minimum, the ``pyproject.toml`` file needs:

Reviewer 3: Sure. The thing I think you should be careful about is implying that the user works directly with the build backend. To a beginner, that's a fairly accurate perception (it's hard to view doing `flit build` or `hatch build` as anything other than "interacting with the backend" unless you're a real pedant!) The fly in the ointment is setuptools - as they've now deprecated running `setup.py` directly, there's no way of building a sdist without using a frontend like `build`.

But I agree, this is getting too complex for what you're trying to say in that paragraph. The later elaboration you suggested sounds good to me.

  (name, version, author and so forth);
  the fields used in ``pyproject.toml``
  are described in `PEP 621`_

* a ``[build-system]`` table specifying your build tool,
  which you will use to create the build artifacts
  and which an installer such as `pip` will use
  to complete an install from a source distribution

.. _Core Metadata: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/core-metadata/

The Build System
----------------

The build tool itself is specified by the required table ``[build-system]``.
There are several choices available, including but not limited to:
`flit`_, `hatch`_, `pdm`_, `poetry`_, `setuptools`_, `trampolim`_,
`whey`_.

.. _flit: https://pypi.org/project/flit/
.. _hatch: https://github.com/ofek/hatch
.. _pdm: https://pypi.org/project/pdm/
.. _poetry: https://pypi.org/project/poetry/
.. _setuptools: https://pypi.org/project/setuptools/
.. _trampolim: https://pypi.org/project/trampolim/
.. _whey: https://pypi.org/project/whey/

For example, here is a table for using ``setuptools`` (see the `Setuptools documentation`_)::

    [build-system]
    requires = [
        "setuptools >= 61.0",
        "trove-classifiers",
        "wheel",

>     ]

Reviewer 2: In the case of setuptools, I think it would make more sense to strip the `requires` to the bare minimum (since the target audience of the document is "beginners", I suppose). Something like:

```toml
[build-system]
requires = ["setuptools>=61.2"]
```

(I bumped to `.2` because it contains some fixes/it is more permissive with input).

    build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"

.. _Setuptools documentation: https://setuptools.pypa.io/en/latest/userguide/index.html

or for ``flit`` (see the `Flit documentation`_)::

    [build-system]
    requires = ["flit_core >=3.2,<4"]
    build-backend = "flit_core.buildapi"

.. _Flit documentation: https://flit.pypa.io/en/latest/

With such a table in the ``pyproject.toml`` file a tool like `build`_
can run your chosen build system to create the build artifacts
and an install tool like `pip` can fetch and run the build system
when installing a source distribution.

.. _build: https://pypi.org/project/build/

The particular build system you choose dictates what additional information is required.

> For example, ``setuptools`` wants a ``setup.cfg`` file containing package metadata
> and it is also prudent to provide a stub ``setup.py`` containing::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if using ``setuptools`` you might want to add a ``setup.cfg`` file
containing package metadata and/or a small ``setup.py`` stub for backward
compatibility, for example::
```

To use the package, end users must:

- download one of the package's build artifacts from the package
  distribution service

- install it in their Python installation, usually in its ``site-packages``
  directory; this install step may involve a build/compile step which,
  if needed, must be described by the package metadata

These last 2 steps are typically performed by a tool like `pip`_.

.. _pip: https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/

The Steps In More Detail
========================

The steps above are described in more detail below.

The Source Tree
---------------

The source tree contains the package source code, usually a checkout from a VCS.
The particular version of the code will will typically be from a checkout
based on a tag associated with the version.

The Configuration File
----------------------

The configuration file depends on the tool used to build the build artifacts.
Modern practice is a ``pyproject.toml`` file in `TOML format`_
whose contents are specified by
`PEP 517`_ and `PEP 518`_ (specifying a build system),
and `PEP 621`_ (storing project metadata in ``pyproject.toml``).

.. _TOML format: https://github.com/toml-lang/toml

> .. _PEP 517: https://peps.python.org/pep-0517/

Author: Aye. Going to use some `:role:` changes too. Thanks!

> .. _PEP 517: https://peps.python.org/pep-0517/

Author: Sorry, `:doc:` etc.
